[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I was expecting
lightning, and angels,
and trumpets in the sky.
And all I got was a bunch of
trees and then the geese flying
in the air.
[CHUCKLE]
And I thought,
how funny is this?
>>It just took me to
a really heavy place.
I struggled with that.
And I knew I had to
either vomit or cry.
And so finally, I ended
up being able to cry
and really let it go.
>>It was a clearly
overwhelming sense
that there was
something much bigger,
and that I was, you know, a
small little ant in this much
bigger divine organization
of the universe,
and that I needed to
pay attention to that.
>>It's gotten me in touch
with my spirit, which I
had like no concept of before.
It opened my heart in
a way that I had never
had it opened before ever.
I committed to her she would be
a teacher of mine for my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The source of the experience
of which these people speak
is not of faith, a
belief in things unseen.
It is simply this,
an herbal brew
made in the jungles of
Peru by native shamans.
They call it ayahuasca,
which means vine of the soul.
>>It's a tea or herbalist
would call a decoction,
meaning a strong tea.
It's always made from
two plants, one of which
contains the hallucinogen
dimethyltryptamine, or DMT.
DMT is what I call
a true psychedelic.
It's one of the
class that includes
LSD, psilocybin, mescaline.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>In the Amazon, ayahuasca
is a legally recognized
sacred medicine.
Indigenous people have
used it for centuries
to heal physical and
psycho-spiritual ills.
[LAUGHTER]
It's an essential part
of the culture, woven
into the fabric of their lives.
Beyond the Amazon, the legality
of ayahuasca is a gray area.
>>The globalization of ayahuasca
is a challenge for modern drug
control authorities.
The people who are
using it outside
of its traditional
context are not
the criminal element that
is associated traditionally
with illegal drug use.
These are people like my
parents, my friends, doctors,
lawyers, people in
the health field
who are passing along
knowledge word of mouth.
And it seems to be spreading.
>>In the last 10
years, thousands
have tried ayahuasca, seeking
healing and spiritual growth.
>>Gracias.
>>The notion that there is a
spiritual component to healing
has been totally excised
from biomedicine.
Spirituality and healing?
What does spirituality
have to do with healing?
>>We live in a culture that's
spiritually very deprived,
very empty.
We live in a culture
that's very material based.
In other words, we
live in a culture
that does not give human
beings what they really need.
That leaves a huge
hole in people.
>>Most people in North
America, in the Western world,
are not as connected as
people who live in the jungle
and live in nature every
day, 365 days a year.
>>Shaman Guillermo
Arevalo believes
everyone can reclaim this
connection through ayahuasca,
which he calls a plant teacher.
He says the vine of the
soul actually teaches you
what you need to know.
>>What is there to
share about ayahuasca?
Can it really heal
our minds and spirits?
Two people are about to journey
to the Amazon to find out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Rob works as an accountant
for a media company.
It's a good job
and pays the bills.
>>It's not something
you walk away
from a day to day basis feeling
satisfied for the most part.
>>How long's the flight?
>>Oh, I think it's eight
hours and into Lima and then
another three hours to Quito.
If everything goes well, I'll
be a completely different person
next Thursday.
>>Will we be able to
still recognize you?
>>Oh yeah.
I'll just be glowing.
[LAUGHTER]
I will.
Going down to Peru at this point
in my life makes a lot of sense
to me partially because I'm
now entering middle age.
And there's a lot
of re-evaluating
that I believe should go on.
I mean, if you're uncertain
of what you believe in,
then you have to start
questioning all things that
are currently in your
life and then seeing maybe
another path to take.
>>Kirsty is a doctor of
naturopathic medicine.
>>You have referred pain
pattern up on your left side.
>>There's a pinch
nerve in my neck.
>>Here?
>>Yeah.
>>I've just started
as a healer myself.
And I think it's a good
time for me in my life
to go down and experience this.
Because if it's in any
way, shape, or form going
to be a part of my life, whether
academically or in terms of I'm
able to use it with
patients, I would never
do that unless I myself had
been through the experience.
>>Are you ready to go, Rob?
>>Let's do it.
In a nutshell, what is missing
in my life is spirituality.
I can say that with
almost complete certainty.
We had very, very slight
religious upbringing.
And it just seemed to have no
foundation or no basis for me
in my life.
It's not that I don't understand
that the best way to live
is to be right and
be right with others,
but I don't have a
guiding light per se.
>>While Rob has never
been to the Amazon,
the rain forest has already
shaped Kirsty's life.
>>I did a lot of traveling both
for work and in a volunteer
capacity.
And I also was a
guide in the Amazon
and was exposed to an enormous
amount of plant medicine.
I've read an awful lot
of about ayahuasca.
And I'm just really
interested in its implications
for a lot of people with
severe chronic disease.
From what I
understand, it really
can open up a lot of energetic
barriers that everyone has.
And if those barriers
are opened up,
you can live more optimally.
>>In the past, Rob has
used recreational drugs
to search for greater meaning
in his life without success.
>>I guess my biggest fear is
simply just getting high again
for two or three
days and really not
having it come to any fruition.
It can't be anything remotely
similar to recreational use.
That's what I'm sick of.
And I certainly don't have to
go to Peru to experience it.
>>Are you actually
holding this up?
Do you need me?
>>No.
Let me just get this straight.
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>I do feel some trepidation
around what I will experience
and what I might discover about
my own energetic blockages.
But about ayahuasca, I'm
not going through this life
and not doing ayahuasca.
There is no way.
>>After a long
trip, Rob and Kirsty
finally arrive at
the rustic retreat
on the edge of the jungle.
Guillermo was there
to greet them along
with an international
group of fellow travelers.
>>Dave, a healer from Canada,
began his apprenticeship
with Guillermo five years ago.
>>As soon as I
started, I thought
this is exactly what my
whole life was about.
I knew that this
was my life path.
But I still had doubt whether
I could actually accomplish it.
My first experience
with Guillermo
was extremely, extremely
profound, very, very deep.
I remember him saying
to me that I was David,
and I was going to face
Goliath, Goliath being
the fear inside of me.
Guillermo has been a shaman
to the Shipibo people
most of his life
but only recently
opened a retreat for Westerners.
[LAUGHTER]
>>He says mostly when people
have bad luck in love.
[LAUGHTER]
>>No translation needed.
>>This is ayahuasca.
>>Mhm.
>>All organisms on the planet
are parasites on plants.
Because plants are the only
thing that make their own food.
And they make their food out
of sunlight, water, and carbon
dioxide.
And because of that, they
are running the show.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I'm extremely
excited about tonight.
We're at the birthplace
where the plants are from.
And just being under
an accomplished master
like Guillermo has to be just a
once in a lifetime experience.
Throughout the
day, I think I went
through a lot of different
emotions and thoughts
about it, some of which
were sort of anxiety.
Am I bit too tired to be
doing this at the moment?
But I actually feel, as
I have since I arrived,
really pretty peaceful.
So hopefully that
bodes well for me.
[LAUGHTER]
>>As darkness
falls, all who wish
to partake in the
ayahuasca ceremony
join Guillermo and his
assistant curandero, Francois.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
>>When I was asked
for my intention,
I felt I didn't really have one.
Or maybe I hadn't given
it enough thought.
And it kind of concerned
me a little bit,
thinking that here I was in
this great center for healing.
And I didn't come down
with a specific problem.
>>My intention was
a hard decision.
Because there are
a lot of things
that I would like to work on.
But the thing I elected
to sort of work on
was it's difficult for me to
see as yet how I can integrate
this on a professional level.
I spoke to Guillermo
and just said,
can you help me to understand?
Because I feel intuitively that
there's a reason that I'm here.
Gracias.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
>>[CHANTING]
>>I was aware of many things
happening all the time,
because all of my senseless
were so heightened.
>>You sit there and you
wonder whether or not
it's taking effect.
And then as soon as you
allow the chanting in,
it pretty much takes you.
>>Purging prepares the mind
and body for the inner journey
ahead.
The chanting then carries
people into a realm
beyond the five senses.
>>The chanting was
transformational.
I actually don't even have
the words to describe that.
>>[CHANTING]
I could feel plants quivering.
And I could feel
everything breathing.
the earth groaning.
And I could hear every single
bird and just this blissed out,
insanely powerful
connection with the earth,
and with plants,
and with animals.
I felt a lot of joy.
>>The feeling is just sublime.
I don't know how to explain it.
Almost every little thing
you do with your body,
as simple head
stretch, a deep breath,
just feels so life affirming.
Because you seem to
be in complete harmony
with everything around you.
You just know that you're
connected to something larger.
>>[CHANTING]
>>Most religions
make a great deal
about how you must have faith.
You must believe in God.
You must believe in what we
tell you even though there's
no evidence to support it,
no evidence for what we're
telling you.
But you must have faith.
What's interesting
about ayahuasca
is you don't have to have faith.
It's the perfect
tool for skeptics.
Don't believe me.
Don't believe what
anybody tells you.
Take it.
Have the experience.
Evaluate it for yourself.
Make of it what you will.
>>Last night, because
we'd been looking forward
to it for quite a
few weeks now, I
had a lot of
expectations built up.
And the ceremony itself
was very impressive.
But I think I didn't
have a strong reaction
to the ayahuasca itself.
It would be nice if it
was a little stronger.
And I don't mean to be
cocky in saying that,
because it's not for
amusement or entertainment.
But I'm ready to kind of go
a little deeper into myself
to see what else comes out.
>>I think the big difference
between the use of ayahuasca
today and the use of other
substances from the 1960s
is a very strong understanding
of the importance of ritual
and a ceremonial
element in fostering
a therapeutic or
spiritual experience.
It's not a party drug in the
way that other substances
have been used.
The wisdom of learning
through plants
is a cultural tradition
that goes back hundreds,
if not thousands, of years.
>>For me, my experience
of botanical medicine
is very technical, and
medical, and scientific.
And we do learn about
the energetics of plants.
But it's much more
dominated by the science.
And so I've always reached
out to have opportunities
to integrate both.
And so that's my goal.
>>You see the heating
aspect of this medicine?
What can you relate about it?
>>In terms of
ayahuasca, I need to do
it many more times,
many, many more times
to be able to speak to that.
Because I can't integrate that
or apply that with other people
until I've integrated
it with me.
I just can't.
>>At a ceremony 15
years ago, Francois
used ayahuasca to help kick
an addiction to heroin.
>>Addiction comes from a
sense of deficient emptiness.
And trying to complete
yourself from the outside
is the essence of addiction.
With ayahuasca, one
has an opportunity
to experience oneself
as whole and complete.
If you can actually get that
you're whole and complete,
what is there to be filled
from the outside anymore?
There's just no need for it.
Ayahuasca can help people
see that in two or three
ceremonies if it's the
appropriate shamanic leader
and if it's the
right environment.
Well, that is a potential
to heal addictions.
>>Ayahuasca is used
for many reasons.
For a curandero
like Dave, ayahuasca
is a teacher of the
healing powers of plants.
>>My home-- please
take off your shoes
before you come in
my home, please.
[LAUGHTER]
Ayahuasca is in many ways like
the key to the door that allows
you into plant teacher world.
Ayahuasca allows you to access
the other plant teachers
in a more profound way.
A plant teacher is--
I mean, the best
way to look at it is you
look at a plant as a being,
and you would-- as a friend.
Each plant has a personality
as each human does.
You take on the traits
of a plant, you know?
And plants are very
sensitive and very intuitive.
And in healing, you need to
be very sensitive and very
intuitive.
So we take these plants to
learn from them and in a way,
to become them.
I came here with the intention
of gaining more strength
in my work.
So I'm on a diet now with
a bunch of different plants
and trees to give me more
strength and more protection.
You smell so beautiful.
It's a mix of 25, 30 different
that I drink every day.
It really breaks down the body
at the beginning to open up.
Your body feels a little bit
out of balance and a little bit
weak.
But the most important thing
is I feel good in my mind.
[CHANTING]
>>After a day of
reflection, Rob and Kirsty
return for their
second ceremony.
>>Again, I was just wanting to
experience so much so quickly.
It was probably overestimating
my level what ayahuasca
wanted to show me at that time.
In a way, I kind of
wanted to take more.
But in a way, I didn't.
You have to respect ayahuasca.
She was telling me something.
>>It's totally different
from the night prior.
I was restless and
sort of agitated.
A part of ayahuasca
is the purging aspect.
I sort of had always just
thought that meant vomiting.
But it just can be a lot of
different bodily things going
on, and noises, and belching.
And it was unbelievable.
I cagey, kind of.
And I tried to leave the
room entirely, actually,
at one point.
But I sort of got
stuck standing there.
It was just frustrating kind of.
When I did go
outside, I found Rob.
>>Oh my god.
>>We saw the sky.
And it was just staggering.
It was just astonishing
how beautiful it was.
And I saw a huge shooting
star, which blew my mind.
>>And then we left.
And when I came back to my
cabin, I kind of laid down.
And I closed my eyes.
And like a lot of times
when you close your eyes,
you see some light imagery.
And then it began
to swirl together.
And it created this
little eddy right
in front of my field of vision.
And then bit by
bit, little images
would appear out of
this eddy-- come out,
and go back in, come
out, and go back in.
When I was ready to write
off the evening as somewhat
of a rejection or
a negative, she
pulled me right back and
then put me to sleep.
>>It's really a therapy.
You have one ceremony,
it's like going
to psychotherapy for two years.
>>Colin from Vancouver attended
ayahuasca ceremonies for a year
before coming to Peru.
He's hoping to heal
a troubled marriage.
>>For me, I just want to be the
father that I know I can be,
and the husband I can
be, and support my wife.
Because family
comes first, right?
>>We had been on and off
and are continuing in kind
of a power struggle stage.
We have done couples
therapy counseling,
but it doesn't quite-- I mean,
it works for a little bit.
But there's a deeper issue.
>>When I came here, I knew I
wanted to go a little deeper.
For me, the one word that
came up with acceptance.
Acceptance of myself,
acceptance of my past,
and acceptance of my wife was
probably the number one thing.
To her, that was the big
blockage in our relationship.
>>There is something that's
obviously keeping us together.
But there is some
kind of something
we keep coming up against.
>>I realized that I've had
this sense of sadness within me
affecting multiple things from
past relationships, people that
have passed in my life,
to sadness around things
around my childhood, and been
unhappy with my sort of place
in the world.
So I'm sad about it at times.
>>After each ceremony, Guillermo
encourages participants to talk
about their experiences.
>>I feel myself attached with
a bit of a dark spirit, which
came to me last night.
And it's all linked to an
ex-girlfriend who has died.
She's since died.
But she's still-- there
was lots of love there.
There was a lot of lightness.
But her dark side is sort
of still hanging on to me.
She's a very manipulative woman.
And it was almost the
first woman in my life.
>>It's very clear.
Gracias.
>>David--
>>I woke up this morning
very early, still very high
with the ayahuasca.
And I had some nightmares, a lot
of sweating during the night,
almost like my body is
trying to move it through.
>>Professionally, in terms of
work as a naturopathic doctor,
I sort of feel confused.
To employ this medicine
even in a limited capacity
probably takes a lot of personal
journeying-- period-- for me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Woo-hoo.
I need to talk it through
with Dave, how he operates.
Because the ceremony is crucial.
And the training is crucial.
>>Ayahuasca--
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>And powder, eh?
>>Ayahuasca and chacruna.
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>It's important for people to
know that the ayahuasca acts
as a teacher.
And it allows you
to discover yourself
through your own knowledge,
through your own experience.
These are all the plans
we use for bathing here.
They bring love, attract
love and good luck.
>>Oh yeah.
>>And all these
medicines up here
are all for men to get
a little extra energy.
>>Oh.
It's a testosterone--
>>It means seven times.
>>Seven times.
>>Seven times per night.
[LAUGHTER]
>>The other thing
that Dave says was
that ayahuasca is
going to meet you
where you're at in terms of what
needs to happen and potentially
to go very deep into your
own fears, and challenges,
and personal growth.
I think next time,
I'm ready to go.
Even if it's challenging,
I'm ready to sort of
have a bit more, and go deeper,
and just face what I find.
>>What Kirsty and Rob will face
on this, their third ceremony,
is unknown and unknowable.
>>The mysterium
tremendum is, as you
can tell from the term,
a tremendous mystery.
It is at the core of
all true religious
or mystical experience,
the feeling of being
at one with the universe.
And yet it's the experience
that most religions
are frantic to deny.
It's not for the
ordinary person.
You know, the interpretation
has to come through the church,
through the priesthood, through
the hierarchy, or whatever.
And we'll tell you
what this means.
And I think that's one
of the interesting things
about ayahuasca.
It gives you a tool
to actually approach
this phenomenon experimentally.
And some people
wait all their lives
and spend years in
meditation and all sorts
of ascetic experiences and never
have a mystical experience.
You can be just a kind
of an ordinary schmuck.
And under the right
circumstances,
psychedelics can trigger
this kind of experience.
>>I'm just experiencing
everything possible that's
in life, I think, in a moment.
And you're just
taking them all in
without trying to
state how you feel.
Just let it be.
And listen to
everything come in.
And it awes you into silence.
Last night was just
the culmination
of finally being at home
down here, good medicine,
and just listening to
Guillermo and everyone chant.
It was everything that it
could possibly be, I think.
It was just perfect.
As my strongest visions
at the very beginning
were like a
multi-level dimension.
And it's like a door
being opened to this.
But it's constantly
being opened.
It's constantly being opened.
And it never goes away,
because it's new again.
And so it's nature
just showing you.
At times I feel like she
could actually control my head
and tilt it different
ways and look around.
And so I would
look at Guillermo.
And it's just--
I don't know how.
But it was so nice.
And it was maternal even
when looking at Guillermo.
Suddenly I wasn't a younger
person than Guillermo.
I was older looking at
him like he was a child.
And you were so
proud of this child.
Look at what he's doing.
She was saying that as
she looked at Guillermo.
Look at all he can do.
And it was just a sense of
awe and renewed innocence
all the time.
But that was partly from her.
And it's the most
spiritual thing
I've ever felt in my whole life.
Well, I could tell Kirsty
wasn't quite having
as great a time as I was.
>>The ceremony last night
was exceptionally hard.
I just couldn't get a nice,
peaceful vision or experience.
There were just moments where
I just couldn't even bear it.
Like, it was just
unbelievably hard.
I felt a lot of dark things.
And this sounds very dramatic.
But it was pretty demonic.
Like, there were some pretty
terrifying moments where
I thought I was going to die.
I thought I was
going to shut down
as a self-protection mechanism.
Because it was I was way,
way beyond dealing with it.
And it literally was like a
miracle, because Dave appeared.
[CHANTING]
>>What happens in a strong
experience with ayahuasca
like that is that
you lose control.
An ego is about having control.
You can't control ayahuasca.
You can work with it.
But if you try to control it
and get into a power struggle
with ayahuasca,
that's where she's
going to come on stronger to
try to have that egoic death
or spiritual death.
[CHANTING]
>>There were emotional
sort of components to it
to do with my family.
People would come to me,
different people in my life
whom I love, would come to me
and try to communicate to me,
and then would be sucked away.
And I would try to
communicate with them.
And then it would
be sucked away.
It was truly, truly
indescribable, the horror.
>>I was so terrified
of losing him,
because he was like a
lifeline, that I was like,
I will drag myself.
I don't care what it takes.
And he helped me get over there.
And then he just--
he did chanting.
He was doing reiki.
[CHANTING]
>>She's lost in this,
like, great big, vast sea.
So I'm there to throw
her a line in a way.
Because she was getting
drowned in her experience.
I'm there to find
her path and find
the way that she got there.
And so I, through the
chanting, find her,
and then bring her back
in her body and back
with her connection.
And then the healing
will start to happen
under its own process.
>>If it isn't the
most humbling thing
I have ever done-- I hope my ego
just stays away and leaves me
alone, like just piss off.
I don't want to deal with that.
I don't want to deal with it.
And Dave said, OK, you're
going to go to Guillermo.
Go to Guillermo.
And I was like, can I crawl?
So I dragged myself.
He addressed my issues at
multiple different levels,
through [INAUDIBLE],
through chanting.
>>[CHANTING]
>>Oh, I was so grateful.
Because they didn't let me
go until I was able to cope.
Like, they passed
me down the chain.
And I just cried and cried.
Because I felt this
insane level of gratitude.
Like I don't even
have words for it.
I felt a kind of love
that I don't think
I've ever felt in my life.
It was not from here.
>>I would turn slightly
and just kind of
let her know I was there.
But that's all you can do.
I mean, you can't verbalize
that sort of thing.
I let her know that I was aware
of what she was going through.
>>Because we really
sort of bonded,
he was quite close to me.
Sometimes his bald head was
like-- [WHOOSHING SOUNDS].
So if I didn't know
him, I would have
been like, dude,
go have your party
like three feet to the side.
Like what are you doing?
But I was comforted
by Rob's presence.
He just was awesome.
He was there the whole time.
We went outside.
And it was dawn.
So it was a magic time
when everything is blue.
And we kind of trotted around.
Because we were just sort
of used to being together.
>>I really am still so
slow-mo-- slow motion.
>>It takes so much out of you.
It's crazy.
>>Oh my god.
I was so glad, Rob,
that you were there.
That literally broke me open.
Like, that literally
annihilated me.
I don't yet know what it means.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>When you think you're going
to die, part of the healing
is that when you do come
out of the experience,
you're just happy to be alive.
And that's the way we need to
live every day of our life.
Part of the enjoyment
of living life
is just be grateful
for your life.
>>Is there a key insight
that you get after you've
taken lots of ayahuasca?
Well, it sounds trivial.
But the insight is
you don't know shit.
We know very little
about the way
the world is put together,
about how the universe really
is, about our role in it,
and what's really going on.
You know, you monkeys only
think you're running the show,
you know?
You don't.
And not only are you
not running the show,
you don't even know
what the show is.
So be humble.
Remember that you
don't know much.
>>Integrating the insights
learned from ayahuasca
can be a difficult task.
Colin is still working to heal
the relationship with his wife
Nina.
>>Hi.
Hi.
>>My wife is my soul mate.
And I really do want to
see that relationship
reach its full potential.
And it can be a
rocky road, you know?
It's got its ups and downs.
It's not all bliss.
It's a process.
And you've been part
of that process,
a big part of the process.
But I finally accepted
things on a level that--
[CRYING]
I accepted things on a
level that produce healing.
>>What he gets from
ceremony is he really
gets in touch with himself,
of a place of acceptance
of himself, acceptance
of me, just letting go
and not needing to control.
And then it will last a month.
And then it explodes into
not being happy, and unhappy
in this relationship,
and complete opposite.
>>I'm sorry.
I'm trying to just
be accepting of it.
But it's hard to completely
accept it all, Colin.
>>I totally understand.
>>Because I feel a lot of the
same kind of stuff before.
It's going to take some
time until I actually
see it as opposed to words.
I think Colin sometimes
feels that he just
needs to live ayahuasca to
ayahuasca ceremony to ceremony.
But you can't just
live in that world.
Your world is family, or
job, whatever it may be.
>>Well, the most important
part of ayahuasca
is the actual integration
into your life.
If you're not
integrating that, there's
no point to any of
these spiritual paths.
Unless we're doing that,
we're wasting our time.
>>It was staggering
the extent to which
I needed to process
what happened in Peru.
It wasn't until
halfway through it
that I realized with
incredible certainty,
like a lightning bolt,
that I had almost missed
the point entirely, which was
that I wasn't there for work.
I mean, the true
purpose in terms
of why I was there had nothing
to do with any of those things.
It was only for me.
It was really hard for me to
articulate what had happened
and how I felt about it.
I became defensive of it.
Because I think the go-to
thought for people is,
oh, you're going getting
high, psychotropic plants
in the jungle.
And it almost is a bit offensive
if you have any experience
with ayahuasca to
think of it that way
or refer to it in that way.
So I would find it
frustrating to sort of try
to explain it to people.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>So what do you think
the ayahuasca did for you?
How did it change your
perception of the world?
>>It just makes you
realize that you're
part of a much larger whole
all the time, whether it's
nature or the other
people in your life.
>>You know, I'm
kind of conflicted.
Because it sounds like it's
a shortcut to meditation
or to spiritual awakening.
And I'm not sure if
that shortcut then
has the long-term effects that,
say, discipline and meditation
would have, you know?
>>I'd have to think
about that some more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I live alone.
Everything I do in
solitary for the most part.
When I came back, it was
on the tip of my tongue
that I should be in closer
contact with my family.
Hey, how's it going?
>>Good.
>>Excellent.
I mean, you can't
pretend to understand
the bosom of
ayahuasca cradling you
unless you realize that you also
have friends and family that
mean a great deal to you.
And you have to take the
love that she shows you there
and spread that around to
your family and friends.
Have a safe trip in tomorrow.
And I'll see you in the morning.
>>Cheers.
We'll see you there.
>>Take care.
>>Even my brother-- I mean,
we're cut from the same cloth.
We've always been kind of
guarded, distant people.
And just to see him
almost gush this morning,
it was just really nice.
>>Over the weeks and
months following,
I realized that I
had never in my life
felt vulnerable the way
that I did in that moment.
Because I had never allowed it.
And ultimately, what I realized
is that to really receive love,
you have to be able
to be vulnerable.
Ayahuasca gave me
a different way
of feeling in my body, a
different way of being,
a different way of viewing
myself in the world.
That it is staggering in
that it allows you to sort of
have a second chance
at being yourself.
>>There's been a trend, I
think, in Western medicine
to recognize that your
alternative healing
practices can be
a useful adjunct
to modern Western approaches.
So I think ayahuasca can be a
valuable component of treating
such things as psychiatric
conditions, depression,
anxiety, addictions, things
that modern Western medicine, I
think, hasn't really done
a good job of addressing.
>>I don't have a
whole lot of optimism
that within my lifetime,
something like ayahuasca
will be safely employed.
If it runs counter to
people's innate prejudices,
it's not incorporated.
Heretical it is to say
it in a medical context,
I don't need decades of research
to tell me that something
is good when I know that it is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>How's it going, bro?
[LAUGHTER]
I haven't seen you
in a long time.
How you doing?
>>Hi.
>>How you doing?
>>Yeah, yeah.
>>Good, good.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>Yeah.
Thank you.
Good to see you.
This medicine has given
me my life, my life path.
I'll be doing this
until I'm old and gray.
That's never been
a doubt in my mind.
It's always been whether or not
I could actually accomplish it.
Just thank Creator
for nourishment,
and nourish our body,
our spirit, our mine.
Help us be strong.
And work in a good way
with the medicine tonight.
It's give me a whole
community of people.
It's given me dear friends.
It's given me a purpose.
It's given me
confidence, just to be
able to acknowledge that I
can do something for people,
and helping people.
>>At Dave's northern
wilderness retreat,
Rob and Kirsty meet for the
first time since their trip
to Peru.
>>I didn't know Rob before this.
But I now know Rob in
rather an intimate way.
>>It was just like some kind
of crazy natural wedding
where we just-- a
union of our souls.
And she was a little
on the downside.
I was a little on the up.
But by the end of the evening,
we were exactly the same place.
>>So we're all going to be
drinking ayahuasca tonight.
Trust yourself.
You've heard the call.
You felt the call to be here.
Some people talk
about the chemical.
That's not a chemical.
Ayahuasca is a spirit.
So approach ayahuasca obviously
respect, with reverence,
and also with gratitude.
I'm always checking
in with my intention.
What is my intention
of carrying this work?
It has to be to share and to
have that experience that you
can get in the Amazon
with traditional healers,
but have it here.
[CHANTING]
When we drink ayahuasca
go outside of the Amazon,
we're not surrounded
by the plants.
So it's also a
different experience.
But you can still take the
spirit of the plant with you.
I have the spirit of
the plant inside me
and the spirit of the jungle.
And I try to share
that with the people.
>>Dave and others
like him are spreading
the gospel of ayahuasca through
ceremonies around the world.
>>My intention is to help
people in their healing,
the healing of our
communities here
and the healing of the planet.
This is why I think ayahuasca
has left the Amazon.
>>We're impacting the
planet in certain areas.
Like the Amazon
is a good example.
We're basically
raping the Amazon.
But maybe this is sending
waves of alarm in some sense
through the rest
of the biosphere.
And in no sense am I
invoking consciousness here,
but it's a defensive strategy
for self-preservation
on the part of not only
ayahuasca but instead I'll
some ways almost on
behalf of everything
that's living on the planet.
Maybe this is the last
desperate ploy of Gaia
to sort of hit us upside
the head and say, you know,
wake up, you monkeys.
You're really
screwing things up.
>>I mean, if ayahuasca
was to be described
as a religion or a faith, it's
all about the earth and all
of the beings, all
of the beings in it,
but in an experiential way.
It's one thing
intellectualize something.
And it's another thing
entirely to touch it
and to experience other bigger
energies that are intelligent.
>>It's very much like
being held to the bosom
of the mother of everything.
>>And it's very much
about love-- period.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]